docs(migrations): add docs for migrations tool (#7158)
confluentinc/ksql: docs/operate-and-deploy/migrations-tool.md

---
layout: page
title: Manage ksqlDB Metadata Schemas
tagline: Manage ksqlDB Metadata Schemas
description: Manage your ksqlDB metadata schemas including streams, tables, and queries.
---

> The `ksql-migrations` tool lets you manage metadata schemas for your ksqlDB clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `ksql-migrations` tool to manage metadata schemas for your ksqlDB clusters
```

by applying statements from *migration files* to your ksqlDB clusters.

> This allows you to keep your SQL statements for creating streams, tables, and queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables you to keep your SQL statements for creating streams, tables, and queries
```

    help                  Display help information
    info                  Displays information about the current and available migrations.
    initialize-metadata   Initializes the migrations schema metadata (ksqlDB stream and table) on the ksqlDB server.
    new-project           Creates a new migrations project directory structure and config file.
    validate              Validates applied migrations against local files.

See 'ksql-migrations help <command>' for more information on a specific
command.
```

The `ksql-migrations` tool supports migrations files containing the following
types of ksqlDB statements:
* `CREATE STREAM`
* `CREATE TABLE`
* `CREATE STREAM ... AS SELECT` 
* `CREATE TABLE ... AS SELECT`
* `CREATE OR REPLACE`
* `INSERT INTO ... AS SELECT`
* `TERMINATE <queryID>`
* `DROP STREAM`
* `DROP TABLE`
* `ALTER STREAM`
* `ALTER TABLE`
* `INSERT INTO ... VALUES`
* `CREATE CONNECTOR`
* `DROP CONNECTOR`
* `CREATE TYPE`
* `DROP TYPE`
* `SET <property>`
* `UNSET <property>`

Requirements and Installation
-----------------------------

The `ksql-migrations` tool is available with all ksqlDB versions starting from

> ksqlDB 0.17 (equivalently, Confluent Platform 6.2). You can use the tool to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ksqlDB 0.17 (equivalently, {{ site.cp }} 6.2). You can use the tool to
```

> manage any ksqlDB cluster running version ksqlDB 0.10 (equivalent, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manage any ksqlDB cluster running version ksqlDB 0.10  
```

> Confluent Platform 6.0) or newer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
({{ site.cp }} 6.0) or newer.
```

### Docker

> To run the `ksql-migrations` tool with docker, you may use either the ksqlDB 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the `ksql-migrations` tool with Docker, you may use either the ksqlDB 
```

server or ksqlDB CLI image. Mount the root directory of your migrations project 
into the container for use by the `ksql-migrations` tool. For example, the 
following command creates a new migrations project in the local 
`./my/migrations/dir` directory to connect to a ksqlDB server listening at 
`http://localhost:8088` (which is accessed from within the docker container 
at `http://host.docker.internal:8088`):

> ```

Reviewer: could be ` ```bash `

docker run -v $PWD/my/migrations/dir:/share/ksql-migrations confluentinc/ksqldb-server:{{ site.ksqldbversion }} ksql-migrations new-project /share/ksql-migrations http://host.docker.internal:8088
```

> Similarly, the following initializes migrations metadata on the ksqlDB server 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, the following command initializes migrations metadata on the ksqlDB server 
```

for the same setup:

```
docker run -v $PWD/my/migrations/dir:/share/ksql-migrations confluentinc/ksqldb-server:{{ site.ksqldbversion }} ksql-migrations --config-file /share/ksql-migrations/ksql-migrations.properties initialize-metadata
```

See the sections below for more on the different `ksql-migrations` commands.

### Archive / deb / rpm

> TODO

Author: This will be added after the docs for archive / deb / rpm for standalone ksqlDB releases are added (cc @JimGalasyn do you have an update on this? Is it already in progress?)

Reviewer: I know @andrewegel is working on this, but I don't know the status.

Reviewer 2: Please translate my comments here: https://confluentinc.atlassian.net/browse/ST-4282?focusedCommentId=476050

into documentation.

Author: Thanks, Andrew. @JimGalasyn do you have a ticket for this? I think we'll want it for 0.16 even.

Author: Removed this TODO for now and filed a ticket (assigned to myself) to add it back in once the other docs for archive / deb / rpm packages are in.

Setup and Initialization
------------------------

### Initial Setup

To get started with the `ksql-migrations` tool, use the `ksql-migrations new-project`
command to set up the required directory structure and create a config file for
using the migrations tool. 

```
ksql-migrations new-project [--] <project-path> <ksql-server-url>
```

The two required arguments are the path that will be used as the root directory
for your new migrations project, and your ksqlDB server URL. 

```
$ ksql-migrations new-project /my/migrations/project/path http://localhost:8088

> 

Reviewer: I'd do the usual "Your output should resemble:" thing here.

Creating new migrations project at /my/migrations/project/path
Creating directory: /my/migrations/project/path
Creating directory: /my/migrations/project/path/migrations
Creating file: /my/migrations/project/path/ksql-migrations.properties
Writing to config file: ksql.server.url=http://localhost:8088
...
Migrations project directory created successfully
Execution time: 0.0080 seconds
```

> This command creates a config file `ksql-migrations.properties`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command creates a config file, named `ksql-migrations.properties`,
```

in the specified directory, and also creates an empty `/migrations` subdirectory.
The config file is initialized with the ksqlDB server URL passed as part of the
command. 

As a convenience, the config file is also initialized with default values 
for other [migrations tool configurations](#config-reference) commented out.
These additional, optional configurations include configs required to access
secure ksqlDB servers, such as credentials for HTTP basic authentication or TLS keystores
and truststores, as well as optional configurations specific to the migrations tool.

See the [config reference](#config-reference) for details on individual configs.
See [here](#connecting-to-confluent-cloud-ksqldb) for the configs required to 

> connect to a Confluent Cloud ksqlDB cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connect to a {{ site.ccloud }} ksqlDB cluster.
```

### Initialize Migrations Metadata

The `ksql-migrations` tool keeps track of applied migration versions in a ksqlDB

> stream and table, the *migrations metadata* stream and table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stream and table, named the *migrations metadata* stream and table.
```

Author: I'm not a huge fan of this suggestion since the name of a stream/table refers to something else -- the (default) name of the migrations metadata stream is `MIGRATION_EVENTS` and the (default) name of the migrations metadata table is `MIGRATION_SCHEMA_VERSIONS`.

I've left the original text for now but can update to say "called the migrations metadata stream and table" if you prefer?

Reviewer: That's cool, maybe mention the default names?

Author: Leaving this as is for now -- I don't think we need to mention the names in this sentence since they're shown in the example output a few sentences below, and the defaults are also in the config reference.

> To begin managing your ksqlDB cluster from your migrations project, first initialize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin managing your ksqlDB cluster from your migrations project, initialize
```

the migrations metadata stream and table on your ksqlDB cluster by using the
`ksql-migrations initialize-metadata` command.

```
ksql-migrations {-c | --config-file} <config-file> initialize-metadata
```

> Pass in the path to the config file of your migrations project in order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide the path to the config file of your migrations project when you
```

                [ {-a | --all} ] 
                [ {-n | --next} ] 
                [ {-u | --until} <untilVersion> ] 
                [ {-v | --version} <version> ]
                [ --dry-run ] 
```

There are four different modes for specifying which migration file version(s)
to apply:
* `all`: Apply all available migration files, from the latest applied version.
* `next`: Apply the next available migration file, from the latest applied version.
* `until`: Apply all available migration files, from the latest applied version
  through the specified `untilVersion`.
* `version`: Apply the migration file with the specified version only. The supplied
  version cannot be older than the latest applied version.
  
In addition to selecting a mode for `ksql-migrations apply`, you must also pass 
in the path to the config file of your migrations project as part of the command.

You can optionally use the `--dry-run` flag to see which migration file(s) the
command will apply before running the actual `ksql-migrations apply` command
to update your ksqlDB cluster. Note that the dry run does not validate whether
the ksqlDB server will accept the statements in your migration file(s); the dry

> run only serves to display which commands the migrations tool will attempt to

Author: I left the word "only" in (despite accepting the rest of the suggestion) since I think it's important to clarify that the dry-run is very limited in what it actually does. I think this will be unintuitive to many users.

Validating current migration state before applying new migrations
Loading migration files
1 migration file(s) loaded.
Applying migration version 2: Add users
/my/migrations/project/migrations/V000002__Add_users.sql contents:
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE users (user_id VARCHAR PRIMARY KEY, email VARCHAR, country VARCHAR) WITH (KAFKA_TOPIC='users', FORMAT='JSON');

Dry run complete. No migrations were actually applied.
Execution time: 1.2270 seconds
```

Once ready, remove the `--dry-run` flag to submit the statements to your ksqlDB
server:

```
$ ksql-migrations --config-file /my/migrations/project/ksql-migrations.properties apply --next

Validating current migration state before applying new migrations
Loading migration files
1 migration file(s) loaded.
Applying migration version 2: Add users
/my/migrations/project/migrations/V000002__Add_users.sql contents:
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE users (user_id VARCHAR PRIMARY KEY, email VARCHAR, country VARCHAR) WITH (KAFKA_TOPIC='users', FORMAT='JSON');

Successfully migrated
Execution time: 1.2320 seconds
```

Note that migration files are not applied atomically. If a migration file containing

> multiple ksqlDB statements fails partway, it's possible that some of the statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple ksqlDB statements fails during the migration, it's possible that some of the statements
```

will have been run on the ksqlDB server while later statements have not.

View Current Migration Status
-----------------------------

To view your current migration version and the status of applied migrations, use the
`ksql-migrations info` command.

```
ksql-migrations {-c | --config-file} <config-file> info
```

> As with previous commands, you should pass in the path to the config file of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with the other commands, pass in the path to the config file of 
```

your migrations project as part of the command.

```
$ ksql-migrations --config-file /my/migrations/project/ksql-migrations.properties info

> 

Reviewer: "Your output should resemble:"

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1       | Initial setup | MIGRATED | <none>           | 2021-03-03 23:47:50.455 PST | 2021-03-03 23:47:50.689 PST | N/A          
 2       | Add users     | MIGRATED | 1                | 2021-03-03 23:51:42.787 PST | 2021-03-03 23:51:42.973 PST | N/A          
 3       | Add orders    | PENDING  | N/A              | N/A                         | N/A                         | N/A          
 4       | Enrich orders | PENDING  | N/A              | N/A                         | N/A                         | N/A          
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

Validate Applied Migrations
---------------------------

The `ksql-migrations validate` command can be used to validate that the migrations
that have been applied to your ksqlDB cluster are the same as the migration files
in your migrations project directory.

```
ksql-migrations {-c | --config-file} <config-file> validate
```

> When a migration files is applied to your ksqlDB cluster, the `ksql-migrations` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a migration file is applied to your ksqlDB cluster, the `ksql-migrations` 
```

tool computes the MD5 hash of the migration file and writes the hash into the
migrations metadata stream as a checksum. The `ksql-migrations validate` command
computes hashes for your local migration files and compares them to the checksums
saved in the migrations metadata stream. 

> To use the command, pass in the path to the config file of your migrations 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the command, provide the path to the config file of your migrations 
```

project as part of the command.

```
$ ksql-migrations --config-file /my/migrations/project/ksql-migrations.properties validate

> 

Reviewer: "Your output should resemble:"

Successfully validated checksums for migrations that have already been applied
Execution time: 1.0360 seconds
```

> Note that this command only validates the checksums saved in the migrations metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `validate` command validates only the checksums saved in the migrations metadata
```

against your local files. The command does not perform any verification on the set of 
streams, tables, queries, and connectors present in your ksqlDB cluster, in relation
to the ksqlDB statements contained in your migration files. 

Reset Migration State
---------------------

If you wish to dissociate your migrations project from your ksqlDB cluster, you can
use the `ksql-migrations destroy-metadata` command to remove all migrations metadata 

> from your ksqlDB cluster. Note that this does not undo any applied migrations; ksqlDB 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from your ksqlDB cluster. This does not undo any applied migrations. Instead, ksqlDB 
```

> statements that have already been submitted to the ksqlDB server will remain intact,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statements that have already been submitted to the ksqlDB server remain intact,
```

> but the migrations metadata stream and table, along with their underlying Kafka topics,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but the migrations metadata stream and table, along with their underlying {{ site.ak }} topics,
```

will be cleaned up from your ksqlDB cluster. This action is not reversible, so
exercise caution when using this command.

Once the migrations metadata has been cleaned up, you can use the 
[`ksql-migrations initialize-metadata` command](#initialize-migrations-metadata) 
to re-create the migrations metadata stream and table in order to 
associate your ksqlDB cluster with a new migrations project.

```
ksql-migrations {-c | --config-file} <config-file> destroy-metadata
```

To use the `ksql-migrations destroy-metadata` command to delete migrations 

> metadata from your ksqlDB cluster, pass in the path to the config file of your 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metadata from your ksqlDB cluster, provide the path to the config file of your 
```

migrations project as part of the command.

```
$ ksql-migrations --config-file /my/migrations/project/ksql-migrations.properties destroy-metadata

> 

Reviewer: "Your output should resemble:"

Dropping migrations metadata table: MIGRATION_SCHEMA_VERSIONS
Dropping migrations metadata stream: MIGRATION_EVENTS
Migrations metadata cleaned successfully
Execution time: 1.6390 seconds
```

Config Reference
----------------

The following properties can be set in your `ksql-migrations.properties` file.
The `ksql-migrations new-project` command sets the `ksql.server.url` property upon
creating the properties file, as this property is required. The properties file
is initialized with default values for other properties commented out. 
To enable other properties, add or uncomment the relevant lines in your 
`ksql-migrations.properties` file. 

Properties have the following format:
```
<property-name>=<property-value>
```

### Required Configs

#### `ksql.server.url`

The URL for your ksqlDB server. For example, `http://localhost:8088`.

### Migrations Metadata Configs

#### `ksql.migrations.stream.name`

The name of the migrations metadata stream. Defaults to `MIGRATION_EVENTS`.

#### `ksql.migrations.table.name`

The name of the migrations metadata table. Defaults to `MIGRATION_SCHEMA_VERSIONS`. 

#### `ksql.migrations.stream.topic.name`

> The name of the Kafka topic backing the migrations metadata stream. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of the {{ site.ak }} topic backing the migrations metadata stream. 
```

Defaults to `<ksql-service-id>ksql_<migrations-stream-name>` where `<ksql-service-id>`
is the service ID of your ksqlDB cluster and `<migrations-stream-name>` is
the value of [`ksql.migrations.stream.name`](#ksqlmigrationsstreamname). 

#### `ksql.migrations.table.topic.name`

> The name of the Kafka topic backing the migrations metadata table. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of the {{ site.ak }} topic backing the migrations metadata table. 
```

Defaults to `<ksql-service-id>ksql_<migrations-table-name>` where `<ksql-service-id>`
is the service ID of your ksqlDB cluster and `<migrations-table-name>` is
the value of [`ksql.migrations.table.name`](#ksqlmigrationstablename). 

#### `ksql.migrations.topic.replicas`

The number of replicas for each of the migrations metadata stream and table.

> Defaults to 1. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default is 1. 
```

### TLS Configs

> If [`ksql.server.url`](#ksqlserverurl) specifies an HTTPS listener, then the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If [`ksql.server.url`](#ksqlserverurl) specifies an HTTPS listener, the
```

> `ksql-migrations` tool will use TLS when connecting to the ksqlDB server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ksql-migrations` tool uses TLS when connecting to the ksqlDB server.
```

#### `ssl.truststore.location`

The path to the TLS truststore.

#### `ssl.truststore.password`

The password for the TLS truststore.

#### `ssl.keystore.location`

The path to the TLS keystore.

#### `ssl.keystore.password`

The password for the TLS keystore.

#### `ssl.key.password`

The password for the TLS key.

#### `ssl.key.alias`

The alias for the TLS key, for look up within the keystore.

#### `ssl.alpn`

> Whether ALPN should be used. Defaults to `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies whether ALPN should be used. Defaults to `false`.
```

#### `ssl.verify.host`

> Whether hostname verification should be performed. Defaults to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies whether hostname verification should be performed. Defaults to `true`.
```

### ksqlDB Server Authentication

#### `ksql.auth.basic.username`

The username that will be used to connect to the ksqlDB server. A username and
[password](#ksqlauthbasicpassword) will be passed as part of HTTP basic authentication. 

#### `ksql.auth.basic.password`

The password that will be used to connect to the ksqlDB server. A 
[username](#ksqlauthbasicusername) and password will be passed as part of 
HTTP basic authentication. 

> Connecting to Confluent Cloud ksqlDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connecting to {{ site.ccloud }} ksqlDB
```

------------------------------------

To use the `ksql-migrations` tool with your [Confluent Cloud ksqlDB](https://docs.confluent.io/cloud/current/get-started/ksql.html)

> cluster, set the following configurations in your `ksql-migrations.properties` file 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster, set the following configurations in your `ksql-migrations.properties` file,
```

> (created as part of [setting up your migrations project](#initial-setup)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is created as part of [setting up your migrations project](#initial-setup).
```

> ```

Reviewer: could be `  ```properties `

  currently present on local disk.
  
With the exception of the first bullet, this is the same verification performed
by the [`ksql-migrations validate`](#validate-applied-migrations) command.

If you find yourself in a situation where validation fails and you are unable
to perform further migrations as a result, you can repair your migrations metadata
so that validation once again passes. This type of intervention may be needed
if a `ksql-migrations apply` command is aborted and a migration status is
never transitioned out of `RUNNING` as a result, or if race conditions between
multiple, simultaneous invocations of `ksql-migrations apply` corrupt the
migrations metadata, as the `ksql-migrations` tool does not support performing
simultaneous migrations. 

To repair your migrations metadata, first inspect the metadata with the
[`ksql-migrations info`](#view-current-migration-status) command.
You can also consume the migration metadata table on your ksqlDB cluster
as a regular ksqlDB table. Here's an example push query, where `<MIGRATIONS_TABLE_NAME>`
is the value of the [`ksql.migrations.table.name` config](#ksqlmigrationstablename),
which defaults to `MIGRATION_SCHEMA_VERSIONS`.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sql
```

SELECT * FROM <MIGRATIONS_TABLE_NAME> EMIT CHANGES;
```

You can then update your migrations metadata by inserting into your migrations
metadata stream, where `<MIGRATIONS_STREAM_NAME>` is the value of the
[`ksql.migrations.stream.name` config](#ksqlmigrationsstreamname), which
defaults to `MIGRATION_EVENTS`, and the other variables represented in angle
brackets are the values to insert:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sql
```

INSERT INTO <MIGRATIONS_STREAM_NAME> (
    version_key, 
    version, 
    name, 
    state, 
    checksum, 
    started_on, 
    completed_on, 
    previous, 
    error_reason
) VALUES (
    '<MIGRATION_VERSION or 'CURRENT'>',
    '<MIGRATION_VERSION>',
    '<MIGRATION_NAME>',
    '<MIGRATION_STATE>'
    '<FILE_CHECKSUM>',
    '<START_TIMESTAMP>',
    '<COMPLETION_TIMESTAMP>',
    '<PREVIOUS_MIGIRATION_VERSION>',
    '<ERROR_REASON>'
);
```

For example, if validation fails because of the latest migration version has
status `RUNNING`, you can manually transition the migration status to
`ERROR` in order to repair the migrations metadata.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sql
```

INSERT INTO MIGRATION_EVENTS (
    version_key, 
    version, 
    name, 
    state, 
    checksum, 
    started_on, 
    completed_on, 
    previous, 
    error_reason
) VALUES (
    '2',
    '2',
    'Add users',
    'ERROR'
    '1bdb2489db5d969dc2f2bc918407f2d6',
    '1615441337127',
    '1615441337408',
    '1',
    'Manual abort after migration stuck RUNNING'
);
```

> If you are performing a repair on the metadata for the latest migration version,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're performing a repair on the metadata for the latest migration version,
```

you'll want to also perform the repair on the version key `CURRENT`, used for
tracking the latest migration version.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sql
```

and truststores, as well as optional configurations specific to the migrations tool.

See the [config reference](#config-reference) for details on individual configs.

> See [here](#connecting-to--siteccloud--ksqldb) for the configs required to 

Reviewer 3: I think this needs to be the expanded value `#connecting-to-confluent-cloud-ksqldb` because the title tag below will have the variable expanded.

Author: Thanks for the catch. It's too bad that means the link is broken when viewed from Github but that's minor as long as the link works on the live site :)
